---
layout: post
title: "When the whole world is speaking Greek to you"
date: 2019-07-23 07:00
categories: [Accessibility, "Inclusive design", "Dyslexia", "Cognitive"]
summary: "In which we design for people with dyslexia by making our text as readable as possible."
audio: "path/to/file.mp3"
---
My son was only 5 years old when his mom and I first suspected he had dyslexia. As we read children’s books with him, we noticed how he seemed to struggle decoding letters.

It took his school another 3 years before we get a call in the vaguest way they know, “We need to discuss your son.”

“We think he might maybe perhaps quite possibly have... dyslexia.”

“Of course he does,” we replied, relieved that they had finally figured it out.

After all, research shows that it’s highly hereditary and his mom has it too.

Dyslexia, a form of learning difference (or neurodivergency) that makes it difficult to read and write, is a deficit in the phonological area of language processing.

*Not a visual processing disorder which people use to believe.*

It’s a product of genetics and the way the brain works and is characterized by difficulties with decoding, fluent word recognition, rapid automatic naming, and/or reading comprehension skills.

It’s as if the whole world spoke Greek to you.

It’s as if everything you read and write, you are having to translate in your head as you go along. It would be mentally exhausting to do this all day, every day.

That’s what it’s like for my son.

And he isn’t alone.

The latest research suggests one in five people worldwide has dyslexia.

**At 1.5 billion people, that’s more than the entire population of China.**

Of all the different learning differences, it’s the most common one.

So common that you probably know someone who has it.

If you don’t, you’ve probably heard of one of these people;

Leonardo da Vinci, Professor Elizabeth Blackburn, Albert Einstein, or Muhammad Ali.

Or Agatha Christie, the self-proclaimed, “extraordinarily bad speller,” whose detective novels has made her the best-selling novelist of all time.

Dyslexia is no barrier to greatness.

But it is an obstacle to reading. What can we do to reduce this?

There are a few typefaces which have been designed to help dyslexic readers, such as Dyslexie, Opendyslexic, and Read Regular.

But, because dyslexia isn’t a visual processing problem, independent studies show no improved reading speed or comprehension for dyslexics when using these typefaces.

*Some of them can still have a dramatic effect for individuals and if you have dyslexia I recommend trying them.*

## Take action

Instead of focusing your efforts on typefaces with minimal-to-no effect, review how your text flows in its layouts.

Read real copy to review your typography because your tone and voice matters and should match the typographic style you choose. 

- Don’t use large blocks of heavy text, instead, **support text with images and diagrams**

- Don’t use italics, write in capitals or underline words that aren’t links, instead, **use sizes to distinguish hierarchy and bold for emphasis**

- Don’t justify text, instead, **align your text to the writing direction of the language (e.g. left for English, right for Arabic)**

- Don’t put too much information in one place, instead, **keep content short, clear and simple**

- Don’t force people to remember things from previous pages, instead, **give contextual reminders and prompts**

- Don’t rely on accurate spelling, instead, **use autocorrect or provide suggestions**

- Don’t use text only, instead, **produce content in other formats (for example, audio and video)**

We all have circumstances when reading text becomes harder than it needs to be; From dyslexia, seasonal flu, or being intoxicated,

By designing for one group of people, like those with dyslexia, the result often helps all groups of all people.

As for my son, once the school started making accommodations to recognise his dyslexia, his reading and writing have improved dramatically.

He’s now also started learning actual Greek.

